If you look at your examples
which I assume you wrote,
There are only two ways
to tell a story in dramatic writing.
By describing an action
and by using dialogue.
Keep in mind that people
are going to watch what you've written.
And it will only come to life
once actors perform it on stage.
That's the only way
to tell the story.
Whatever description you write
won't necessarily be seen.
Writing a script is specifically
to provide instruction
to the director, actor,
and production crew.
That's the reason
why scripts are written that way.
You have to indicate
who is speaking and what she'll say.
You also have to include
what the character will do.
Will she drink?
Will she sit?
Will she cry at this point?
Will she scream?
Will she commit murder?
Are they going to fight?
These are all written
in the script you're writing.
And...
this includes what
and how she's saying it,
and the words she's using.
Okay, let's try it.
Who wants to start?
Hector: "Cut!"
"Didn't I tell you to slap first
and then look at the camera?"
Diane: "I'm trying a new style."
Hector: "This isn't the time to do that."
Diane: "I'm sure we have time,
we have all the time in the world."
Hector: "We're out of time.
I've run out of patience."
Diane: "I've been very patient with you."
"I've waited so long. Surely, what's a few
more minutes to try this out?"
Hector: "No. You know what?
I can't work with you anymore."
Diane: "Let's be professional."
"What? You can't function anymore
just because I called it quits?"
"You used to give me freedom.
We used to explore all these things together."
Hector: "Consider that a privilege
that you no longer have."
"You enjoyed that for seven years.
And just because we can't take it one step further...?"
"No, that's done. I'm done.
You're nothing to me."
Diane slaps him
and looks at the camera.
So he didn’t explain.
From what we’ve heard,
let's determine...
the who, what, where,
and why to find out.
And if there’s a how.
Let’s start with the "who."
Who did we see
or hear in the scene?
They have names.
Hector and Diane.
And then?
What are they?
- Diane is an actress.
- And Hector?
Director.
Where are they?
They're in a shoot.
But we don’t know the setting
of the shoot yet.
What's happening?
- The director's telling her
she couldn’t get the scene right.
- But she takes it personally.
- Or she made it personal.
Who's taking it personally?
Diane.
She's taking the comments personally.
- Seems like their working relationship's
been constrained for sometime.
Did we get it right?
Based on the...
- Yeah, deeper.
Or are you just agreeing...?
- Just to say something.
Is there anything else?
Nothing?
So the whole set-up is a film shoot.
Who's next?
Okay, Carlo.
- In a dark, hazy,
claustrophobic room
Karlo is in an Indian sitting position.
- He's doing what?
Karlo's in an Indian sitting position
facing the window.
There's a silhouette
because of the bright sunlight.
He has a smoke on one hand
and beer on the other.
Karlo.
"Six years."
"It's been that long."
"Expired, in other words."
"But it's as if everything's still fresh
whenever I think of you."
"I miss you."
"I need some peace of mind but...
...you're so far away."
"I'm here in Manila
while you're there in Batanes."
"But, no."
"I'll stop."
"I'll stop this."
"I'll go to you
so I can stop this."
"To put my heart at ease."
"Even if I have to ride a plane,
I'll do it."
"I need to do this."
"I need this, Mateo."
I need what?
- Mateo.
- I need this, Mateo.
Oh, it's "I need this, Mateo."
Are you done?
Alright.
Let’s find the who, what, where.
- In a dark, hazy room.
Okay, in a dark and hazy room.
Where is this?
Manila or Batanes?
- Manila.
Of course, it says so in the dialogue.
What's happening?
Carlo is just sitting in his room.
He's like...
And he's thinking aloud.
He's contemplating
on his solitude.
From what to where...
did the play or the scene go?
In the beginning, he’s thinking about
how the relationship isn’t working.
It's conflicting for him.
His last line was he needed
to do something about it.
Carlo is the one talking, right?
- But he’s by himself, right?
- Yes.
So he’s like saying
something to Mateo,
about their long distance
relationship.
- Long distance.
- Separated.
And he's going to find a way
so they can be together.
That’s the impression
of what Karlo wants to do.
I actually feel like he might be
bordering towards suicide.
- Wow.
It tugs at your heart, right?
His smoking and drinking
are also factors.
Okay, so it also establishes
the character's disposition.
One significant component
you should think about
when you're describing an action
or what the character is doing,
is that the action should be performable.
It means the actor
is capable of executing it.
If she's going to sit,
she's going to sit.
So active action?
Active action.
She could be thinking.
She sat down to think.
That's performable.
Compared to when
you give instructions like
“She’s thinking of what she’ll do
for her birthday,"
"because it will happen
in two days.”
How will you perform that?
She sat down to think.
That's acceptable.
She sat down, thinking, in fear.
That's performable.
But if you just describe what she'll do
and what she's thinking about,
that's a bit hard to perform.
How did Carlo solve
that problem in his piece?
Since his character
is sitting down, drunk, smoking...
What did he do with the character?
He did a monologue.
And that's one of the reasons why
dramatic writing is different.
The actor is forced to do a monologue,
to let out his inner thoughts.
By virtue of that,
you're already defying realism.
It's very rare to see a person
sitting down saying,
"You're so far away,"
"I'm just here,
while you're over there."
"I don't know what I'm supposed to do."
It’s either you’ll see that or think,
"is she on the phone?"
or "is she talking to herself"?
if you're using the realistic mode.
But then it’s a perfectly valid device
for a theatrical presentation.
You’ll notice the writer is forced
to have the character speak her mind.
She can't just think it.
It has to manifest in the dialogue
or lines of the actor.
The interaction of the action
and the dialogue
is crucial in dramatic writing.
Always remember that.
It's important
to make your character move.
Because that's the most--
As we always say,
"Action speaks louder than words."
It's more impactful
if a character stabs someone
rather than just saying,
"I'll kill you"
because she already killed that person.
That’s the power
of the action line in the script.
Dialogue can do a lot of things.
Number one, it determines
who is talking.
A lawyer talks differently
from a ten-year-old child.
An angel talks differently
from a demon.
The choice of words
defines a character.
Aside from that,
characters can also define
the style of the dialogue used.
If it's poetic, the setting
could be from long ago.
Though it can still be poetic today.
There are musicals that use rap.
But you know it's not realistic
because there's a rhythm to it.
There are plays that seem so real,
even when there's hardly any dialogue,
because you can feel the tension.
Next.
The stage is dark and there's someone
knocking at the door.
There's no sound onstage
and the knocking gets intense.
Mauro gets up from the audience
wearing short shorts,
an undershirt, and a bit of make up
while holding a ladle.
The knocking gets louder.
Mauro: "Wait, I'm already coming, my god!"
Mauro heads for the door
at the center of the stage.
He opens it with his back
facing the audience.
He sees Father Victor
in jogging pants and a wet white shirt.
Obviously coming from a workout.
Mauro is stunned and gulps.
Mauro: "Let me guess,
you must be..."
Fr. Victor: "You're late."
Mauro: "It wasn't that long."
"Of course."
He rapidly says,
"Gourmet sardines
with cold stir-fried rice
and some scrambled eggs
with freshly picked ripe tomatoes."
Msgr. Cervantes: "What are those?"
Mauro: "Just sardines, fried rice, eggs,
and tomatoes fresh from the backyard."
Msgr. Cervantes: "Dios mio."
Fr. Victor: "It's good that
Mauro's here at the convent."
"Although he's a bit rowdy,
at least it's cheerful here."
Mauro: "Cleanliness and orderliness
is next to godliness."
Fr. Victor: "You're so witty, Mauro.'
Mauro: "Maureen, Father. Maureen."
Msgr. Cervantes: "Maureen? It's Mauro!"
"A name is sacred
and cannot be easily changed. "
"You were born as Mauro,
you will die as Mauro."
Mauro: "What if I don't like it, monsignor?"
"Even Charice is Jake Zyrus now.
How conservative."
"If you don't like Maureen,
I'll just be Maui then."
"Maybe that will do?"
Msgr. Cervantes: "Coffee!"
Where are we?
Where does the scene take place?
- He said it's in the convent.
Convent.
What kind of convent is this?
Where is this convent?
- Someone's wearing jogging pants.
Next.
- Setting: A mountain in Tanay.
Woman: "It's so nice here.
The wind is cool, relaxing."
"Away from all the noise in the city.
It's so refreshing."
There's a voice over.
"It's so nice to jump, right?"
- "Who's there?"
"You can see everything from here.
The concrete buildings, the noise which mess up your life..."
"They're far away from you
while you're here in complete solitude."
"You'll get to see
even farther if you jump."
- "What are you? A talking plant?"
"No, I man the zipline.
Are you ready to go?"
The woman gets shocked.
She gets shocked when she sees
the guy behind her.
She is stunned.
The guy is also taken aback
when their eyes meet.
Voice over: "Are you ready to jump?"
The woman smiles giddily.
- "I'll jump if you come with me."
The end.
- Short and sweet.
"That Thing Called Tadhana."
The dialogue defines the style,
setting, atmosphere, mood
character and rhythm
of the whole play.
There are lengthy plays
with so many monologues.
The lines are really long.
There are also short
but staccato-like lines.
“Yes no, no yes.”
Something like that.
It’s in the style you choose.
In fact, you don’t actually need
fancy sets, right?
Of course, it has its function now.
But for the basic unit of a scene,
you just need dialogue
and action to create a play.